Website Tutorial: Thing Description in Practice - Building a Thing (#246)
w3c/wot-cg: Tutorials/whatiswot/website/docs/wot/td-in-practice/building-a-thing.md

      } else {
        console.log(`  ❌ Could not brew: ${output.message}\n`);
      }
    } else {
      console.log(`  ✅ ${output.message}`);

      const currentWater = await (await fetch(waterForm.href)).json();
      const currentBeans = await (await fetch(beansForm.href)).json();
      console.log(`  Water remaining: ${currentWater}ml | Beans remaining: ${currentBeans}g\n`);
    }
  }

  process.exit(0);

}

run().catch(console.error);
```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

</details>

Make sure your Thing is running (`node thing.js` in another terminal), then run:

```bash
node consumer.js
```

Expected output (typing `medium` then `quit`):

```
Connected to: Smart Coffee Machine

Initial state — Beans: 320g | Water: 1000ml

Enter coffee size (small / medium / large) or 'quit' to exit: medium
  ✅ Brewing a medium coffee
  Water remaining: 820ml | Beans remaining: 308g

Enter coffee size (small / medium / large) or 'quit' to exit: quit
```

This is the complete WoT interaction loop: the Thing describes itself, the Consumer reads that description, and all communication flows from it. The Consumer has no hardcoded knowledge of the Thing's internals — only the TD URL.

---

## Next Steps

> You now have both a working Thing and a Consumer that interacts with it. In the next tutorial, we'll extend both sides together: the Thing gains CoAP and MQTT support, and the Consumer grows to select protocols from the TD and subscribe to the `lowOnWater` event in real time.

Reviewer: This needs to be adapted to the feedback of the next tutorial as the Thing will not have many protocols at once.

---
sidebar_label: Building a Thing
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Building a Thing

## Introduction

So far in this series, we've covered the core concepts of the Web of Things: what a Thing Description is, how Interaction Affordances work, and how Forms and protocol bindings connect abstract operations to real network traffic. Now it's time to put it all into practice.

In this tutorial, you'll build a working smart coffee machine — the same example we've been using throughout the series — from scratch. By the end, you'll have a running Thing that exposes a property and an action, and a Consumer application that interacts with it.

We'll show you two ways to build it, running side by side:

> - **node-wot** — the official W3C implementation of the WoT standard, built by the Eclipse Thingweb team. It takes care of generating the Thing Description, exposing your affordances over HTTP, and handling all the WoT interaction patterns automatically — so you can focus on your application logic instead of networking details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **node-wot** — a reference W3C implementation of the WoT standard, provided by the Eclipse Thingweb project. It takes care of generating the Thing Description, exposing your affordances over HTTP, and handling all the WoT interaction patterns automatically — so you can focus on your application logic instead of networking details.
```

- **Express.js** — a popular Node.js web framework that many developers already know. We'll build the same Thing manually alongside it, so you can see exactly what node-wot is doing under the hood and understand why it is worth using.

---

## What We're Building

Our smart coffee machine will expose the following interaction affordances in this tutorial:

| Affordance | Type | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `coffeeBeansLeft` | Property | Returns the amount of coffee beans remaining (grams) |
| `waterLevel` | Property | Returns the current water level (milliliters) |
| `brewCoffee` | Action | Starts brewing a cup of coffee (small / medium / large) |

Multi-protocol support and the `lowOnWater` event will be added in the next tutorial.

---

## Part 1: Setting Up Your Project

> Create a new folder for your project and initialize it:

Reviewer: Maybe some warning can be added like, we will assume a unix environment for some commands.

```javascript
thing.setPropertyReadHandler("coffeeBeansLeft", async () => coffeeBeansLeft);
thing.setPropertyReadHandler("waterLevel", async () => waterLevel);

thing.setActionHandler("brewCoffee", async (params) => {
  const input = await params.value();
  const size = input?.size;

  const beanUsage  = { small: 8,   medium: 12,  large: 16  };
  const waterUsage = { small: 120, medium: 180, large: 240 };

  if (isBrewing) {
    console.log("Brew rejected: machine is already brewing");
    return { success: false, message: "already brewing" };
  }

  if (coffeeBeansLeft < beanUsage[size]) {
    console.log(`Brew rejected: not enough beans (${coffeeBeansLeft}g left, need ${beanUsage[size]}g)`);
    return { success: false, message: "Not enough coffee beans" };
  }

  if (waterLevel < waterUsage[size]) {
    console.log(`Brew rejected: not enough water (${waterLevel}ml left, need ${waterUsage[size]}ml)`);
    return { success: false, message: "Not enough water" };
  }

  isBrewing        = true;
  coffeeBeansLeft -= beanUsage[size];
  waterLevel      -= waterUsage[size];

  console.log(`Brewing ${size}. Beans: ${coffeeBeansLeft}g | Water: ${waterLevel}ml`);

>   setTimeout(() => {

Reviewer: This is complicated and should not be shown in the first tutorial, even though it makes sense. It should either brew instantly or let the response wait for the brewing

    return { success: false, message: "Not enough coffee beans" };
  }

  if (waterLevel < waterUsage[size]) {
    console.log(`Brew rejected: not enough water (${waterLevel}ml left, need ${waterUsage[size]}ml)`);
    return { success: false, message: "Not enough water" };
  }

  isBrewing        = true;
  coffeeBeansLeft -= beanUsage[size];
  waterLevel      -= waterUsage[size];

  console.log(`Brewing ${size}. Beans: ${coffeeBeansLeft}g | Water: ${waterLevel}ml`);

  setTimeout(() => {
    isBrewing = false;
    console.log("Brewing complete!");
  }, 3000);

  return { success: true, message: `Brewing a ${size} coffee` };
}

app.get("/smart-coffee-machine", (req, res) => res.json(thingDescription));
app.get("/smart-coffee-machine/properties/coffeeBeansLeft", (req, res) => res.json(coffeeBeansLeft));
app.get("/smart-coffee-machine/properties/waterLevel", (req, res) => res.json(waterLevel));
app.post("/smart-coffee-machine/actions/brewCoffee", (req, res) => {
  res.json(handleBrew(req.body.size));
});

app.listen(8080, () => {
  console.log("Thing exposed on:");
  console.log("  HTTP → http://localhost:8080/smart-coffee-machine");
});
```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

</details>

---

> ## Part 4: Testing Your Thing with a Request

Reviewer: I think we can also mention some GUI clients that the devs would be familiar with such as Postman, Bruno, Insomnia etc. all with their hyperlinks

:::

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080/smart-coffee-machine
```

**Read the property:**

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080/smart-coffee-machine/properties/coffeeBeansLeft
```

Expected: `320`

**Invoke the action:**

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="macos-linux" label="macOS / Linux" default>

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/smart-coffee-machine/actions/brewCoffee \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"size": "medium"}'
```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="windows" label="Windows (PowerShell)">

```powershell
Invoke-WebRequest -Uri "http://localhost:8080/smart-coffee-machine/actions/brewCoffee" `
  -Method POST `
  -ContentType "application/json" `
  -Body '{"size": "medium"}'
```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

The response will be `{"success":true,"message":"Brewing a medium coffee"}`. Your server terminal should show `Brewing medium. Beans: 308g | Water: 820ml`.

:::tip

Verify the state changed by reading the properties again — beans should now be `308` and water `820`.

:::

---

## Part 5: Your First Consumer

> So far we've been using `curl` to interact with the Thing manually. In a real WoT system, a Consumer is an application that fetches the TD and uses it to drive all interactions — no hardcoded URLs or protocol details. The TD URL is the only entry point it needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far we've been using `curl` to interact with the Thing manually. In a real WoT system, a Consumer is an application that fetches the TD and uses it to drive all interactions — no hardcoded URLs or protocol details. The TD or its URL is the only entry point it needs.
```

Create a new file called `consumer.js` in the same project folder.

### Step 1: Set up the Consumer runtime

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="nodewot" label="node-wot" default>

Just like the Thing side uses a Servient with servers, the Consumer side uses a Servient with client factories — one per protocol it wants to support. Here we only need HTTP. We also set up `readline` to accept input from the terminal.

```javascript
const { Servient } = require("@node-wot/core");
const { HttpClientFactory } = require("@node-wot/binding-http");
const readline = require("readline");

const rl = readline.createInterface({ input: process.stdin, output: process.stdout });

> function ask(question) {

Reviewer: I don't get why is the variable called `question`?

Author: I guess maybe prompt works better here? Since its prompting the user before requiring input;

```javascript
const td = await WoT.requestThingDescription(
  "http://localhost:8080/smart-coffee-machine"
);
const thing = await WoT.consume(td);
console.log(`Connected to: ${td.title}\n`);

const beans = await (await thing.readProperty("coffeeBeansLeft")).value();
const water = await (await thing.readProperty("waterLevel")).value();
console.log(`Initial state — Beans: ${beans}g | Water: ${water}ml\n`);
```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="express" label="Express.js">

We fetch the TD and read both properties to print the initial state.

```javascript
const td = await (await fetch(TD_URL)).json();
console.log(`Connected to: ${td.title}\n`);

const beansForm = td.properties.coffeeBeansLeft.forms.find((f) => f.op === "readproperty");
const waterForm = td.properties.waterLevel.forms.find((f) => f.op === "readproperty");

const beans = await (await fetch(beansForm.href)).json();
const water = await (await fetch(waterForm.href)).json();
console.log(`Initial state — Beans: ${beans}g | Water: ${water}ml\n`);
```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Step 3: Invoke an action in a loop

> Rather than a one-shot brew, the Consumer runs an interactive loop — it prompts for a size, invokes the action, and prints the machine's state after each brew. The action returns a `{success, message}` object, so the Consumer can display a specific message for each failure case.

Reviewer: Does node-wot return "success" message?

Reviewer: Sorry my bad on this one.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="nodewot" label="node-wot" default>

In node-wot the runtime is called a Servient. We create one, attach an HTTP server, and start it. Everything else happens inside the `.then()` callback once the runtime is ready. We call `WoT.produce()` with an object that mirrors the TD structure — node-wot registers all HTTP routes and generates the full TD automatically.

```javascript
const { Servient } = require("@node-wot/core");
const { HttpServer } = require("@node-wot/binding-http");

let coffeeBeansLeft = 320; // grams
let waterLevel = 1000;     // milliliters

const servient = new Servient();
servient.addServer(new HttpServer({ port: 8080 }));

servient.start().then((WoT) => {
  WoT.produce({
    title: "Smart Coffee Machine",
    description: "Remote controllable coffee machine",
    id: "urn:uuid:0804d572-cce8-422a-bb7c-4412fcd56f06",
    "@context": "https://www.w3.org/2022/wot/td/v1.1",
    securityDefinitions: { nosec_sc: { scheme: "nosec" } },

>     security: "nosec_sc",

Reviewer: these are not needed as well :)

```

Any time you add a route below, you must also add a matching `forms` entry to the TD above — otherwise the TD and the server go out of sync.

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Attaching Read Handlers

With the TD defined, we connect it to the actual values the properties should return.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="nodewot" label="node-wot" default>

`setPropertyReadHandler` runs whenever a Consumer reads that property. It simply returns the current value of the matching variable.

```javascript
thing.setPropertyReadHandler("coffeeBeansLeft", async () => coffeeBeansLeft);
thing.setPropertyReadHandler("waterLevel", async () => waterLevel);
```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="express" label="Express.js">

Each property needs a `GET` route that returns its current value as JSON.

```javascript
app.get("/smart-coffee-machine/properties/coffeeBeansLeft", (req, res) => {
  res.json(coffeeBeansLeft);
});

app.get("/smart-coffee-machine/properties/waterLevel", (req, res) => {
  res.json(waterLevel);
});
```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Exposing the Thing

The last step starts the server and makes the Thing reachable on the network.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="nodewot" label="node-wot" default>

> `thing.expose()` starts the HTTP server and publishes the Thing. The full TD — with all `forms` filled in automatically — becomes available at the root URL.

Reviewer: publishes the Thing? do you mean exposing the Thing or publishing the TD? It does not publish the TD anywhere, just makes it available as well
